stdenv: PURL fetcher introduction (#454333)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/stdenv/meta.chapter.md

#### `meta.identifiers.possibleCPEs` {#var-meta-identifiers-possibleCPEs}

A readonly attribute containing the list of guesses for what CPE for this package can look like. It includes all variants of version handling mentioned above. Each item is an attrset with attributes `cpeParts` and `cpe` for each guess.

### Package URL {#sec-meta-identifiers-purl}

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Reviewer: I am in agreement that we shouldn't push tools to trying to guess. Especially with tools that try to be efficient and can parallelize things, it makes the concurrency more difficult. Imo, it would be great if `drv.meta.identifiers.purl` defaults to `drv.src.meta.identifiers.purl`. I know people would be concerned with eval performance.

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Author: @RossComputerGuy it would be helpful that the SBOM team meets and agrees on an approach. CRA is due in september this year and this should get included in nixos 26.05 - at least the reduced fetcher part

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Reviewer: I get that, though I don't think this is something we can or should rush. I want PURL's just as much as anyone else does. However, we should do this properly. 26.05 is close but I am not super confident that it's possible at this point to get PURL's in.

I think my concern about `drv.src.meta` vs `drv.meta` is something that's big enough (considering that it impacts how the identifier should be discovered & consumed). I don't think it's a bad idea for the SBOM team to sync up. However, it is difficult to get people to sync up for something like this with these sorts of projects. I do think that there should be more of a discussion and thorough review before we attempt to merge this PR.

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Reviewer 2: I agree 'deeper' integration would likely be too ambitious for 26.05, but 'just' being able to populate the `drv.meta` seems feasible and already a helpful step in the right direction, doesn't it?

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Reviewer: Yes, as long as whatever is scanning nixpkgs doesn't have to figure out where the identifiers coming from and can just assume `drv.meta` like with CPE's, I think that is good. With these sorts of things, usually the first NixOS release doesn't have much use of it. Usually it gets flushed out over the following 2 or 3 releases.

The only blocker I see is not needing to figure out if it's `drv.src` or `drv.srcs` for the identifiers. Once that's solved, I don't have any objections to merging this PR.

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Author: > populate the drv.meta seems feasible and already a helpful step in the right direction, doesn't it?

@raboof the current PR is feasible. Please keep in mind that despite 95% of purls coming out of the box, it is required to manually maintain the remaining ones. This is something which may land 26.11, but no one is investing into something which is an open PR. My ask would be to merge this as a first step into the right direction, i can then work on contributing missing purl informations - since this takes time.

> The only blocker I see is not needing to figure out if it's drv.src or drv.srcs for the identifiers. Once that's solved, I don't have any objections to merging this PR.

@RossComputerGuy blocking the full PR does not make sense IMHO, we may go and land this as a first milestone? Maybe even mark it as experimental, which gives time and others confidence that it may not be "stable"?

#### `meta.identifiers.purlParts` {#var-meta-identifiers-purlParts}

This attribute contains an attribute set of all parts of the PURL for this package.

* `type` mandatory [type](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/18fd3e395dda53c00bc8b11fe481666dc7b3807a/docs/standard/summary.md) which needs to be provided

> * `spec` specify the PURL in accordance with the [purl-spec](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/18fd3e395dda53c00bc8b11fe481666dc7b3807a/purl-specification.md)

Author: one additional remark @raboof: the spec field makes validation of purl easier. You do not need to do regex parsing to determine the pattern for subsequent validation, you can have a simple switch case statement

#### `meta.identifiers.possibleCPEs` {#var-meta-identifiers-possibleCPEs}

A readonly attribute containing the list of guesses for what CPE for this package can look like. It includes all variants of version handling mentioned above. Each item is an attrset with attributes `cpeParts` and `cpe` for each guess.

### Package URL {#sec-meta-identifiers-purl}

> [Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages. Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management. Package URL's shall default to the mkDerivation.src, as the original consumed software package is the single point of truth.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Package-URL](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) (PURL) is a specification to reliably identify and locate software packages.
Through identification of software packages, additional (non-major) use cases are e.g. software license cross-verification via third party databases or initial vulnerability response management.
Package-URLs shall default to the `mkDerivation.src`, as the original consumed software package is the single source of truth.
```

#### `meta.identifiers.purlParts` {#var-meta-identifiers-purlParts}

This attribute contains an attribute set of all parts of the PURL for this package.

* `type` mandatory [type](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/18fd3e395dda53c00bc8b11fe481666dc7b3807a/docs/standard/summary.md) which needs to be provided
* `spec` specify the PURL in accordance with the [purl-spec](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/18fd3e395dda53c00bc8b11fe481666dc7b3807a/purl-specification.md)

#### `meta.identifiers.purl` {#var-meta-identifiers-purl}

> An extendable attribute which is built based on purlParts. It is the main identifier, consumers should consider using the PURL's list interface to be prepared for edge cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An extendable attribute which is built based on `purlParts`.
This is the main identifier of the software package.
For handling edge cases, consider using the list interface [`meta.identifiers.purls`](#var-meta-identifiers-purls).
```

#### `meta.identifiers.purls` {#var-meta-identifiers-purls}

> An extendable attribute list which defaults to a single element equal to the main PURL. It provides an interface for additional identifiers of mkDerivation.src and / or vendored dependencies inside mkDerivation.src, which maintainers can consciously decide to use on top. Identifiers different to the default src identifier are not recommended by default as they might cause maintenance overhead or may diverge (e.g. differences between source distribution pkg:github and binary distribution like pkg:pypi).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An extendable list attribute which defaults to a single element equal to [`meta.identifiers.purl`](#var-meta-identifiers-purl).
It provides an interface for additional identifiers of `mkDerivation.src` or for identifiers of vendored dependencies inside `mkDerivation.src`, which maintainers may carefully consider to specify as well.

Additional identifiers are generally not recommended, as they might cause maintenance overhead or diverge.
For example, a source distribution `pkg:github` may be hard to keep correctly aligned with the corresponding binary distribution `pkg:pypi`.
```

Is that what you're trying to say?
